Section 16b 
Higher education 
(1) For the purpose of full-time studies at a state or state-recognised university or a 
comparable educational institution, a foreigner is granted a temporary residence permit if he 
or she has been accepted by the educational institution. Residence for study purposes also 
extends to measures to prepare for studies and compulsory training. Measures to prepare 
for studies are 
1. 
attending a language course to prepare for studies, if the foreigner has been 
accepted for full-time studies and the acceptance depends on the foreigner attending the 
preparatory language course, and 
2. 
attending a preparatory or comparable course prior to studying, if the foreigner 
can prove that he or she has been accepted for the preparatory or comparable course. 
Proof of knowledge of the language needed for the specific course of studies is only required 
if the foreigner’s knowledge of the language has not been tested in the decision on 
acceptance and language acquisition is not the aim of the preparatory measures for the 
course of study. 
(2) The period of validity when the temporary residence permit for study purposes is granted 
for the first time and for each subsequent extension is, as a rule, two years and is not 
generally to be less than one year. The period of validity is at least two years if the foreigner 
takes part in Union or multilateral programmes that comprise mobility measures or if the 
foreigner is covered by an agreement between two or more higher education institutions. 
Where the course of study takes less than two years, the temporary residence permit is 
granted only for the duration of the course of study. The temporary residence permit is 
extended if the purpose of residence has not yet been achieved and is achievable within a 
reasonable period of time. The host educational institution may be consulted to find out 
whether the purpose of residence is still achievable. 
(3) In accordance with the following sentences, the temporary residence permit only entitles 
the holder to employment of up to a total of 140 working days per year (working day 
account). Student jobs are not counted. Part-time employment will be counted as follows in 
the way most favourable for the foreigner: 
1. 
every day on which the working time does not exceed four hours may be 
counted for the working day account as one-half working day, otherwise as a full working 
day, or 
2. 
employment may be counted for the working day account per calendar week 

Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection 
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze-im-internet.de 
Page 22 of 168 
a) 
during the semester, if a maximum of 20 hours per calendar week are 
worked, and 
b) 
other than during the semester 
independent of how the working time is distributed, as two and one-half working days. The 
most favourable method as referred to in sentence 3 means determining for each calendar 
week whether the employment is counted according to sentence 3 no. 1 or no. 2. 
(4) During residence as referred to in subsection (1), no temporary residence permit may be 
granted for employment under section 19c (1) in conjunction with a provision of the 
Ordinance on the Employment of Foreigners for temporary employment. Section 9 does not 
apply. 
(5) A foreigner may be granted a temporary residence permit, if 
1. 
the foreigner has been accepted by a state or state-recognised or comparable 
educational institution 
a) 
for full-time studies, with acceptance dependent on a condition which does 
not aim at attending measures to prepare for studies, 
b) 
for full-time studies, with acceptance dependent on attending a preparatory 
or comparable course, but the foreigner is unable to furnish proof of being 
accepted for a preparatory or comparable course pursuant to subsection (1) 
sentence 3 no. 2 or 
c) 
for part-time studies, 
2. 
the foreigner has been enrolled in a preparatory language course, without 
having been accepted for a course of study by a state or state-recognised university or a 
comparable educational institution, or 
3. 
the foreigner has been accepted for a preparatory company traineeship. 
In the cases covered by sentence 1 no. 1, subsection (1) sentences 2 to 4 and subsections 
(2) to (4) apply accordingly. In the cases covered by sentence 1 nos. 2 and 3, subsections 
(2) to (4) are to be applied accordingly; in addition, the temporary residence permit allows 
holders to work as a trainee pursuant to sentence 1 no. 3. 
(6) Before the temporary residence permit under subsection (1) or (5) is withdrawn, revoked 
or its period of validity reduced pursuant to section 7 (2) sentence 2 for reasons which are 
beyond the foreigner’s control, the foreigner is to be given the opportunity, for a period of up 
to nine months, to apply for admission to another educational institution. 
(7) Foreigners who have been granted international protection status in another member 
state of the European Union are, as a general rule, to be granted a temporary residence 
permit for study purposes if they pursued studies in another EU member state for at least 
two years and the requirements of section 16c (1) sentence 1 nos. 2 and 3 apply. The 
temporary residence permit will be granted for the part of the studies to be carried out in 
Germany. Subsection (3) applies accordingly. Section 9 does not apply. 
(8) Subsections (1) to (4) and (6) serve to implement Directive 2016/801/EU of the European 
Parliament and of the Council of 11 May 2016 on the conditions of entry and residence of 
third-country nationals for the purposes of research, studies, training, voluntary service, pupil 
exchange schemes or educational projects and au pairing (OJ L 132, 21.5.2016, p. 21).