Section 16f 
Language courses and school attendance 
(1) A foreigner may be granted a temporary residence permit to attend language courses 
which do not serve to prepare for a course of study or to participate in a pupil exchange 
scheme. A temporary residence permit for participation in a pupil exchange scheme may 
also be granted in cases where there is no direct exchange. 
(2) As a general rule, a foreigner is to be granted a temporary residence permit to attend 
school as of grade nine, provided it is guaranteed that the school class comprises pupils of 
various nationalities and that the school 
1. 
is a state or state-recognised school with an international orientation or 
2. 
is a school which is not or not primarily funded from public funds and prepares 
pupils for international qualifications, qualifications issued by other countries or state-
recognised qualifications. 
(3) As a general rule, while foreigners are residing in Germany to attend school under 
subsection (2), they are to be granted a temporary residence permit for another purpose only 
if they are legally entitled to it. After staying in Germany to take part in a pupil exchange 
scheme foreign pupils may only be granted a temporary residence permit for another 
purpose if they are legally entitled to it. Section 9 does not apply. The temporary residence 
permit under subsection (1) to attend a language course only entitles the foreigner to pursue 
employment of up to 20 hours per week. The temporary residence permit under subsection 
(1) to participate in a pupil exchange scheme and the temporary residence permit under 
subsection (2) do not entitle holders to pursue an economic activity. 
(4) Bi- or multi-lateral agreements of the Länder with public bodies in another country 
governing attendance of domestic schools by foreign pupils remain unaffected. A temporary 
residence permit to attend school can only be issued on the basis of such agreements if the 
supreme Land authority responsible for residence law has endorsed the agreement.