Section 5 
General prerequisites for granting residence titles 
(1) As a rule, a residence title is granted subject to the following conditions: 

Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection 
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze-im-internet.de 
Page 7 of 168 
1. 
the foreigner’s subsistence is secure; 
1a. 
the foreigner’s identity, and if he or she is not entitled to return to another state, 
nationality are established, 
2. 
there is no public interest in expelling the foreigner, 
3. 
if the foreigner is not entitled to a residence title, the foreigner’s stay does not 
threaten or jeopardise the interests of the Federal Republic of Germany for any other 
reason, and 
4. 
the passport obligation laid down in section 3 is met. 
(2) Further, a temporary residence permit, EU Blue Card, ICT Card, permanent settlement 
permit or an EU long-term residence permit is granted on the condition that the foreigner 
1. 
has entered the country with the necessary visa and 
2. 
in the visa application, has already furnished the key information required for 
granting the title. 
The requirements stipulated in sentence 1 may be waived if the prerequisites for granting a 
residence title are met; the requirements stipulated in sentence 1 are to be waived if special 
circumstances in the individual case concerned render a subsequent visa application 
procedure unreasonable. Sentence 2 does not apply to granting an ICT Card. 
(3) Application of subsections (1) and (2) is to be waived in the cases of a residence title 
granted pursuant to section 24 or section 25 (1) to (3); application of subsection (1) nos. 1 to 
2 and 4 and subsection (2) is to be waived in the cases of section 25 (4a) and (4b). 
Application of subsections (1) and (2) may be waived in the other cases of granting a 
residence title pursuant to Chapter 2 Division 5. Where application of subsection (1) no. 2 is 
waived, the foreigners authority may point out that expulsion is possible on account of 
certain public interests in expelling the foreigner which are the subject of criminal or other 
proceedings still in progress; such interests must be specified individually. Application of 
subsection (2) is to be waived in the event of a residence title granted pursuant to section 26 
(3). Application of subsection (2) is to be waived in the event of a temporary residence permit 
granted pursuant to sections 18a, 18b, 19c (2) or Division 6 in application of section 10 (3) 
sentence 5. 
(4) A residence title is to be denied if there is a public interest in expelling the foreigner under 
section 54 (1) nos. 2 or 4 or a corresponding deportation order has been issued under 
section 58a.