Section 81 
Applying for a residence title 
(1) In the absence of any provisions to the contrary, a residence title is issued to a foreigner 
only upon application by said foreigner. 
(2) A residence title which may be obtained after entering the federal territory in accordance 
with the statutory instrument under section 99 (1) no. 2 must be applied for immediately after 
entry or within the period stipulated in the statutory instrument. The application for a child 
born in the federal territory who is not to be granted a residence title ex officio is to be filed 
within six months of birth. 
(3) If a foreigner who is legally resident in the federal territory and does not possess a 
residence title applies for a residence title, his or her residence is deemed to be permitted up 
to the time of the decision by the foreigners authority. If the application is filed too late, 
deportation is deemed to be suspended from the time of application up to the time of the 
decision by the foreigners authority. 

Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection 
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze-im-internet.de 
Page 128 of 168 
(4) If a foreigner applies for an extension of his or her residence title or for a different 
residence title before his or her current residence title expires, the current residence title is 
deemed to remain in force from the time it expires until the time of the decision by the 
foreigners authority. This does not apply to visas issued in accordance with section 6 (1). If 
the application to issue or extend a residence title was filed too late, the foreigners authority 
may order that the previous residence title remains valid in order to avoid undue hardship. 
(5) The foreigner is to be issued with a certificate confirming the effect of the application 
(provisional residence document). 
(5a) In the cases of subsections (3) and (4), the economic activity described in the future 
residence title for residence pursuant to Chapter 2 Divisions 3 and 4 is deemed to be 
permitted from the time the document is requested until it is handed over in accordance with 
section 78 (1) sentence 1. The permission to pursue an economic activity pursuant to 
sentence 1 is to be included in the certificate referred to in subsection (5). 
(6) If the application for a temporary residence permit allowing the subsequent immigration of 
dependants wishing to join the holder of an ICT Card, a Mobile ICT Card or an EU Blue Card 
is filed at the same time as the application for an ICT Card, a Mobile ICT Card or an EU Blue 
Card, the application for the temporary residence permit allowing the subsequent 
immigration of dependants is decided upon at the same time as this application. As a rule, 
the same applies if the application for a temporary residence permit allowing the subsequent 
immigration of dependants wishing to join the holder of a temporary residence permit 
pursuant to section 18a or section 18b is filed at the same time as the application for a 
temporary residence permit pursuant to section 18a or section 18b. If immediately before 
being granted the EU Blue Card, the holder of the EU Blue Card had an EU Blue Card 
issued by another member state of the European Union, the family unit already existed in the 
other member state of the European Union, and the application is filed at the same time, but 
the dependants do not enter the federal territory until after the EU Blue Card is granted, the 
temporary residence permit allowing the subsequent immigration of dependants is to be 
granted no more than 30 days after the submission of the complete application. In justified 
exceptional cases, the time limit may be extended by 30 days. 
(6a) If the foreigner has an EU Blue Card which was issued by another member state of the 
European Union, the applicant and the other member state of the European Union are 
notified of the decision on the application to grant an EU Blue Card no more than 30 days 
after the submission of the complete application. In justified exceptional cases, the time limit 
may be extended by 30 days. The applicant is to be informed no more than 30 days after the 
submission of the complete application if the time limit is to be extended. No more than 30 
days after the submission of the complete application, the holder of the EU Blue Card may 
pursue employment if he or she has been authorised to work in that occupation. 
(7) If the foreigner’s identity is to be verified using identification measures in accordance with 
section 49 of this Act or section 16 of the Asylum Act, then a provisional residence document 
as referred to in subsection (5) may only be issued or a residence title may only be granted if 
the identification measures have been conducted and the data collected from the measure 
have been stored in the Central Register of Foreigners (Ausländerzentralregister).