Section 29 
Special registration requirement for commercial accommodation 

Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection 
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze-im-internet.de 
 
Page 17 of 39 
(1) Anyone staying in facilities for the purpose of the commercial reception of 
persons (commercial accommodation) for longer than six months is subject to the 
registration requirement under section 17 or section 28. Anyone who is not 
registered at a residence in Germany is required to register with the registration 
authority within two weeks as soon as his or her stay exceeds three months. 
(2) Foreign nationals staying in commercial accommodation are required to sign a 
special registration form on the day of arrival which contains the data referred to in 
section 30 (2). Only the number of accompanying foreign spouses, life partners and 
minor children is to be stated on the registration form. In the case of groups of more 
than 10 persons travelling together, the requirement under sentence 1 applies only 
to the group leader; he or she is required to state the number of foreign nationals in 
the group and their nationality. 
(3) Foreign nationals staying in commercial accommodation who are to be named 
on the registration form as required by subsection (2) are to verify their identity by 
presenting a valid identity document (recognised and valid passport or passport 
substitute) to the managers of the commercial accommodation when checking in. 
(4) Persons spending the night in tents, caravans, motor caravans or water vessels 
at commercially operated sites are not subject to the registration requirement under 
section 17 (1) and (2) as long as they are registered in Germany in accordance with 
section 17 or section 28. Anyone who is not registered in accordance with section 
17 or section 28 is required to register with the registration authority within two 
weeks as soon as his or her stay exceeds three months. Subsections (2) and (3) 
apply accordingly to foreign nationals. 
(5) In derogation from subsection (2) sentence 1, the registration requirement may 
also, with the consent of the person staying in commercial accommodation, be met 
in such a manner that the data referred to in section 30 (2) are collected 
electronically and the person staying in the commercial accommodation confirms 
their accuracy and completeness on the day of arrival by 
1. 
using a card-bound payment method with Strong Customer Authentication (SCA) 
within the meaning of section 1 (24) of the Payment Services Supervision Act 
(Zahlungsdiensteaufsichtsgesetz) in the course of which the payment method’s 
specific allocation number is captured, 
2. 
providing electronic proof of identity pursuant to section 12 of the eID Card Act (eID-
Karte-Gesetz) or section 78 (5) of the Residence Act or 
3. 
using his or her eID card in accordance with section 13 of the eID Card Act or his or 
her residence title in accordance with section 78 (5) of the Residence Act for the 
purposes of on-site reading. 
Anyone operating commercial accommodation may, in relation to his or her own 
commercial accommodation and other commercial accommodation which is 
contractually associated with his or her commercial accommodation for the purpose 
of providing commercial accommodation services, submit to the Federal Office for 
Information Security an application for the approval, for a period of no more than five 
years, of a procedure other than that referred to in sentence 1 in order to test other 
electronic procedures for fulfilling the registration requirement if 
1. 
the data referred to in section 30 (2) are collected electronically with the consent of 
the data subject, 

Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection 
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze-im-internet.de 
 
Page 18 of 39 
2. 
the person staying in commercial accommodation confirms, in a suitable manner, 
the accuracy and completeness of the data referred to in no. 1 on the day of arrival 
and 
3. 
a level of security comparable to the procedures referred to in sentence 1 nos. 1 to 3 
exists. 
Anyone who offers electronic procedures to fulfil the registration requirement is 
entitled to submit an application as referred to in sentence 2. 
(6) Subsections (2) and (3) do not apply to 
1. 
residential institutions providing youth or adult education, basic or advanced training 
if persons are accommodated for those purposes, 
2. 
company or club accommodation if only company employees or club members and 
their family members are staying there, 
3. 
youth hostels and mountain huts, institutions of public or publicly recognised youth 
work providers in temporary use or 
4. 
institutions of religious communities under public law.