Section 19 
Cooperation by the supplier of the residence 
(1) The supplier of the residence is obligated to cooperate when it comes to the 
registration. To that end, the supplier of the residence or someone commissioned by 
him or her is required, within the period stated in section 17 (1), to send confirmation 
of a person having moved in either in writing to the person required to register or 
also electronically to the registration authority in accordance with subsection (4). He 
or she may contact the registration authority to find out whether the person required 
to register has registered. The person required to register is to provide the supplier 
of the residence with the information necessary to confirm that the former has 
moved in. The confirmation referred to in sentence 2 may only be issued by the 
supplier of the residence or someone commissioned by him or her. 
(2) If the supplier of the residence or the person commissioned by him or her 
refuses to provide confirmation, or if the person required to register does not receive 
confirmation in a timely manner for other reasons, the person required to register is 
to inform the registration authorities thereof without delay. 
(3) The confirmation provided by the supplier of the residence contains the following 
data: 
1. 
the name and address of the supplier of the residence and, if that person is not the 
owner, also the name of the owner, 
2. 
the date moved in, 
3. 
the address of the residence and 
4. 
the names of the persons required to register in accordance with section 17 (1). 
(4) If the confirmation is provided electronically to the registration authority, the 
supplier of the residence receives a reference number, which he or she is to notify to 
the person required to register to use when registering. Section 10 (2) and (3) 
applies accordingly. If the registration authority makes available other means of 

Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection 
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze-im-internet.de 
 
Page 12 of 39 
authentication as regards the supplier of the residence, it is to be ensured that 
measures as referred to in Articles 24, 25 and 32 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 are 
implemented. 
(5) The registration authority may require the owner of the residence and, if the 
owner is not the supplier of the residence, also the supplier of the residence to 
provide information concerning persons currently living at his or her residence or 
who lived there in the past. 
(6) It is prohibited to offer or make available to a third party the address of a 
residence for the purpose of registration in accordance with section 17 (1) if the third 
party neither moves into the residence nor intends to do so.