Section 27 
Exceptions to the registration requirement 
(1) There are no grounds for a registration requirement under section 17 (1) and (2) 
if a person who is registered at a residence in Germany moves into collective 
accommodation or other officially provided housing in order to 
1. 
perform compulsory military service pursuant to the Compulsory Military Service Act 
(Wehrpflichtgesetz) or voluntary military service pursuant to the Act on the Legal 
Status of Military Personnel (Soldatengesetz), 
2. 
perform federal volunteer service pursuant to the Federal Volunteer Service Act 
(Bundesfreiwilligendienstgesetz), 
3. 
perform civilian alternative service pursuant to the Act on Civilian Alternative Service 
(Zivildienstgesetz), 
4. 
perform a service as referred to in Division 4 of the Act on the Legal Status of 
Military Personnel, 
5. 
serve in the Bundeswehr as a career service member or temporary career volunteer 
or as a police officer in the Federal or Land police, unless residing at the 
accommodation for more than 12 months, 
6. 
take part as a public service employee in courses or specialised studies for basic or 
advanced training. 
(2) Anyone who is registered in Germany in accordance with section 17 or section 
28 and moves into a residence for a stay of no more than six months is not required 
to register or deregister at this residence. Anyone who has not moved out of this 
residence after six months have elapsed is required to register with the registration 
authority within two weeks. As regards persons who otherwise live abroad and are 
not registered in Germany in accordance with section 17 (1), this requirement 
applies after three months have elapsed. 
(3) The exception to the registration requirement under subsection (2) does not 
apply to 

Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection 
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze-im-internet.de 
 
Page 16 of 39 
1. 
ethnic German resettlers and their family members if they are assigned a place of 
residence pursuant to section 8 of the Federal Expellees Act 
(Bundesvertriebenengesetz) and 
2. 
asylum applicants or other foreigners who temporarily move into a reception centre 
or other assigned housing. 
To meet the registration requirement under subsection (2) in conjunction with 
sentence 1 no. 2, the body responsible for keeping the records of persons in 
reception centres may submit the data required for registration to the registration 
authority in the form of a list. A copy of the record kept pursuant to foreigners law 
may be submitted instead of a list. In both cases, submission in electronic form is 
permissible. 
(4) As regards a person who has been deprived of his or her liberty by judicial 
decision, section 17 (1) does not establish a registration requirement as long as 
1. 
the period of enforcement of the deprivation of liberty does not exceed three months 
or 
2. 
the data subject is registered in Germany in accordance with section 17 or section 
28 and the period of enforcement of the deprivation of liberty does not exceed 12 
months. 
Otherwise, the management of the detention facility is required to notify the 
registration authority responsible for the site of the detention facility within the two 
weeks following the person’s admittance and release; the data subject is to be 
informed. The notification contains the data to be included in the registration form. 
The notification takes the place of registration as required by section 23 (1). 
Division 4 
Special registration requirements