Section 23 
Fulfilling the general registration requirement 
(1) Unless otherwise stipulated below, the person required to register is required to 
fill out and sign a registration form and present it to the registration authority 
together with his or her national identity card, temporary national identity card, 
substitute national identity card, recognised and valid passport or passport 
substitute and the confirmation from the supplier of the residence or the reference 
number as referred to in section 19 (4) sentence 1. If the population register is 
automated, no registration form is needed if the person required to register appears 
in person at the registration authority and confirms, by signing a printout, the 
accuracy and completeness of the data collected by the registration authority. 
(2) The registration authority responsible for the new place of residence is obligated 
to present to the person required to register the data provided by the registration 
authority responsible for the previous place of residence as required by section 3 (1) 
nos. 1 to 18 and (2) no. 4 (pre-filled registration form). Data concerning a legal 
representative, spouse, life partner or minor children relating to whom a block on 
releasing information within the meaning of section 51 or a conditional block on 
releasing information within the meaning of section 52 has been entered may not be 
included in the pre-filled registration form. The person required to register is required 
to review the transferred information for accuracy, to rectify any inaccurate 
information and to add any missing information. He or she is required to sign the 
updated, pre-filled registration form and return it to the registration authority 
responsible for the new place of residence. In the event that it is not possible to 
generate a pre-filled registration form, the person required to register is to fill out and 
sign a registration form. 
(3) The person required to register supplies his or her family name, given names, 
date of birth and previous address for the pre-filled registration form. The registration 
authority responsible for the new place of residence transfers these data to the 
registration authority responsible for the previous place of residence in order to 
request the data as required by section 3 (1) nos. 1 to 18 and (2) no. 4. The 
registration authority responsible for the previous place of residence transfers the 
requested data to the registration authority responsible for the new place of 
residence without delay. 
(4) Spouses, life partners and family members having the same moving dates and 
previous and current addresses are, as a rule, to use the same registration form. 
Registration by one of the persons required to register suffices. Subsections (2) and 
(3) apply accordingly if the person required to register provides an assurance that he 
or she is authorised to receive the data of the other persons required to register. He 
or she is to be advised that obtaining such data without authorisation is a criminal 
offence under section 202a of the Criminal Code (Strafgestzbuch). 
(5) In derogation from subsection (1), the registration of persons who have moved 
into a reception centre may be done using an automated procedure by copying the 
data from the Central Register of Foreigners in accordance with section 18e of the 
AZR Act. 
(6) Deregistration on moving abroad may be done in writing or, applying section 10 
(2) and (3) accordingly, electronically. In the case of electronic deregistration, the 
person required to deregister may confirm his or her identity by providing his or her 
family name, given name, date of birth and serial number of the national identity 

Service provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection 
and the Federal Office of Justice ‒ www.gesetze-im-internet.de 
 
Page 14 of 39 
card or passport last stored in the population register in accordance with section 3 
(1) no. 17.